1-2-3-SV pipeline description
Pipeline is available from gitHub, under URL https://github.com/Vityay/1-2-3-SV

1. NGS data alignment

The sequencing data for the pipeline can be mapped with any tool that supports
BAM output format or outputs format that can be converted to BAM. We used BWA
(http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/) version 0.5.9 and used separate mapping of
Forward and Reverse tags (samse command of bwa aligner). Data mapped in paired
fashion ( sampe ) can also be used by the pipeline, however we must note that
results of relative placement of tags may substantially differ between these
two approaches.

Read names should match between forward and reverse tags or become the same
after trimming (trim option in configuration file). 

2. Estimation of insert size distribution and location of discordant tags

This step is performed separately for each library. It outputs distribution
of insert sizes and files that capture location of discordantly mapped reads
for each type: inverted, everted and remote (forward and reverse tags mapped
to different chromosomes). When two BAMs are supplied, it is assumed that
mapping was done in independent way. When analyzing one BAM file, paired
mapping mode is expected. Potential PCR duplicates (clones from the same library
that share same mapping locations of tags) are discarded. A user can specify to
discard reads that do not fulfill his/her criteria for unique mapping :
uniqueness of mapping(max_ambiguity = X0), absence of secondary hits 
(secondary_hits = X1), absence of gaps(alignment_gaps = XO), or even mismatches
(alignment_mismatches = XM) in the read-to-reference alignment. When big datasets   
need to be analysed on a workstation with small RAM size analysis can be
serialized (“chunks” option), at the expense of additional computation time.

Modify: configuration file 123SV.conf
Run: 123SV1.pl <library_id>
Example: perl 123SV1.pl 1
 
3. Clustering of discordant pairs at population level 

This step of analysis is done separately for pairs with discordant orientation
of tags (everted, inverted and remote) and pairs with discordant distance
between tags (insertion and deletion). Clustering of discordant pairs is done
in agglomerative manner. Two pairs are considered to belong to the same cluster
when distance between coordinates of their 5-prime tags together with distance
between 3-prime tags does not exceed x times median distance of the library with
bigger insert sizes (from the two libraries where the clones belong).  Parameter
x is given by “SV_max_distance” parameter in configuration file and is set to 1
by default. Search is continued until no clusters with at least “SV_min_clones”
can be found.

This step can be serialized by chromosomes or genome ranges to limit memory
usage and speed up the analysis by running as different processes (e.g. on
different nodes of a cluster system). 

Run: 123SV2.pl
Example: perl 123SV2.pl deletion 0 

4. Output format
As discordant pair analysis does not give exact breakpoints of structural
variants, the output lists genome segments containing each breakpoint along
with information about source of the clones (samples) that contributed to the
cluster and the properties of the cluster.

Columns 1-3: Chromosome, start position and end position of range where first
breakpoint can be found.

Columns 4-6: Chromosome, start position and end position of range where second
breakpoint can be found.

Column 7: Libraries and number of clones that contributed to the SV call. String
lists library IDs (as given in configuration file) followed by number of clones
in brackets.

Column 8: Relative orientation and strand of the tag pairs in the SV call.
Specifies the number of observed tags that link first segment to second in
“tail-to-head” (TH, 3-prime of first segment is linked to 5-prime of second
segment) or any other combination. Strand of first read in the pair is reflected
as well: big caps for plus strand (e.g. 'TH') and small caps for minus strand
(e.g. 'th').

Column 9: Total number of tag pairs that triggered the SV call 

Column 10: Proportion of  tag pairs that overlap with each other ( can be
significantly below 100% when  independent SVs were grouped into single
cluster/SV call.

Column 11: Expected distance between first and second segments (given in
columns 1-3 and 4-6) estimated by most optimal fitting with insert size
distribution observed at step #2. Significantly negative values may represent
complex SV events with local rearrangement of genomic segments.

Column 12: Relative probability (compared to a “best case” scenario where
all pairs have modal insert size) through all clones in the cluster.  Low values
( < 0.4 ) may indicate compound SV clusters and can be avoided by lowering
SV_max_distance parameter in configuration file.


